good evening good morning
um wherever you find yourself my name is
tara needham i am the assistant academic
director at the hannah arendt center for
politics and humanities at bard college
in the hudson valley of new york state
if you are
zooming in from afar and abroad
we are so thrilled to see so many people
logging on and logging in for this very
important conversation about debt and
finance capital
um we're also thrilled to be
co-sponsoring this event with the museum
of care
and with the economic democracy
initiative at bard college
you know when we were approached by mika
dubrovsky
we felt the words a real resonance
between um what she described as the
mission of the museum of care
which projects uh whose projects aim to
create a public space to discuss what
dostoyevsky called the cursed questions
what is power what is freedom value and
so on
the hannah rent center similarly
promotes bold and risky thinking
in the spirit of a rent and to aims to
create forums the debate of ideas on
pressing topics of our time
there's no doubt that debt and finance
capital are such issues
that have immense bearing on
topics that were of great concern for a
rent democracy freedom the possibility
for spontaneity and political action
that said our participation is not to
suggest that a rent herself
would have or that the center
necessarily
agrees with or endorses all the views of
the panelists rather
our goal is again to invite and foster
lively debate and we hope that
participants
will respectfully challenge question and
clarify clarify the points of view
presented tonight
so it's now my great pleasure um
to introduce nika dabroski
who is an artist and an author who grew
up in the unofficial cultural scenes of
squats in samidzat of the late ussr
she's written for many publications and
exhibited at among others the tel aviv
museum
galleria nova zagreb showroom london
fabrica moscow and apex art new york
she works on several publishing and
artistic projects including yes women
group art activist feminist community
and others
after her husband david graber's death
mika and friends organized carnival for
david which took place in 250 places
around the world carnival for david
evolved into the informal community of
the museum of care
which is creating projects like the one
tonight at the intersection of academia
activism and contemporary art so welcome
to nika our panelists and everyone
participating
so
thank you very much for hosting this
event
and
um
yeah the
the first
of uh the fight club between michael
hudson and thomas piketty was held on
the 10th anniversary of the edition of
david grabber's book 5 000 years of debt
i want to say that a lot has changed for
the better since then
the public discourse has shifted
now many people recognize that for what
it is structural violence second the
abstract depth was created and i'm
especially happy that astra taylor is
with us today
astra is not only shares the ideas of
david
michael hudson and steve king that all
deaths should be abolished but its
strike them is successfully buying out
unfair debts for example student medical
debt
acting essentially in the same way as
abolitionists did freeing people from
that slavery
and i want to encourage everyone who
watch us today to help them
i would like to announce our next fight
club that will be at house culture
developed in berlin the spring with
actors and activists david's friends to
perform an imaginary fight between david
greber and thomas hopes and david greber
versus jean-jacques rousseau
starring
jacques servin of the yes man reverend
billy and sarah 3d of the church of
stock shopping
um this fight is a major point uh that
was explored in david's last book dawn
of everything that he wrote with an
archaeologist david van gro
in the first fight club
the fight had so many rounds that we
didn't have time to answer questions
from the public so in the spirit of the
boxing match we are going to have our
combat michael hudson conduct a
post-match debrief
where the public can ask questions and
get answers
so meet steve kim michael hudson pavlina
cernova and astra taylor
who won last time
what do you think
[Applause]
[Music]
we have a problem let's solve it
together
[Music]
the game is on
[Applause]
[Music]
okay everyone
my name is astor taylor can you guys see
me or
okay great uh my name is ashley taylor
thank you so much for the kind
introduction nika and i just want to
reiterate thanking our hosts
the internet center and the museum of
care thanks for for having us um
and i i watched the first fight club
with great interest
uh noting the paradox between the terms
care and fighting so this will be
a loving debate um with a lot of i think
agreement among the participants but um
one thing i will say is as an activist
and organizer working very hard on the
issues of debt cancellation
i am
constantly encountering critics and
criticism so i will do my best maybe to
channel some of the contrarianism that i
face when i share these ideas
so my name is astrid taylor i'll be i'll
be quick
but just to set the stage uh yeah my uh
my
my friend the lighting great david
graber
sort of
recruited me into uh what became a kind
of debt resistance movement he actually
invited me to the planning sessions of
occupy wall street uh so this was back
in 2011
and um
i was at that point at recently
defaulted student debtor
and
you know understood that my condition
was political but didn't have any people
to share that that uh sense with
certainly didn't have the sense that the
the wider world you know shared my sense
of of injustice
uh and uh out of the ashes of occupy
wall street we started organizing around
debt based in the recognition that a lot
of people came to occupy were in debt
for education for health care of course
it was the mortgage crisis that that it
was the larger framework so debt was
everywhere once you started looking at
it and uh since then you know david
eventually went to the uk
i kept organizing with people and we
launched something called uh the debt
collective which is a union for debtors
and
um we have been organizing primarily
around the issue of student debt
cancellation though we though we also
work on other types of debt for example
some of our co-founders planned the
first protest demanding full student
debt cancellation and free public
college in 2012 marking one t day the
day student debt surpassed one trillion
dollars it's now 1.8 trillion
uh so math in terms of pure math things
have gotten a lot worse but as nika said
rightly the discourse is much better
uh and partly because of the debt
collective we've unearthed the various
legal mechanisms by which it is actually
very possible for the government to
cancel student debt and we have forced
them to cancel
uh upwards of 10 billion dollars of
student debt just in 2021 alone
so debt cancellation is we've proven
it's a realistic demand it's a very
popular one
i i just saw an ad for stacey abrams
who's running for governor of georgia
and she talks about medical debt
cancellation in her campaign ad so i
think that's another sign of the times
so i think um
you know i won't delay us but but we are
definitely in a in a moment where i
think the question is how can we keep
expanding the public imagination on this
issue how can we address some of the
doubts people have because not everybody
agrees and then yeah strategically what
do we do where is the power
and we have a great panels here to talk
about these issues and and to address
some of the common concerns you know
people are worried about
the the deficit right worried about the
way that this will affect uh there's a
lot of misapprehensions about how
personal debt and public debt relates
hopefully we can set some of those
straight here
uh some of the questions that we can
return to according to the the materials
circulated in advance
should student debbie canceled i already
answered that yes and it can be
can the government run out of money
what is money what is debt
um so if people
i want to invite people to touch on
those points since that's what the
audience was told they'd hear about i
also want to invite people to use the q
a function
that is that is here we're going to also
address some of the questions from the
last century session as as they as nika
said that didn't get answered
so i'm going to briefly introduce our
panelists the esteemed uh michael hudson
who you know has been working on the
question of jubilee
for a long time and really is in many
ways inspiration for david's work for
the debt collective's work
really blaze an incredible trail talking
about the history and precedence and
philosophy of jubilee and more michael
hudson is president of the institute for
the study of long-term term economic
trends a wall street financial analyst
distinguished research professor of
economics at the university of missouri
kansas city
he is the author of and for give them
their debts 2018 and j is for junk
economics and i assume there are many
other books
steve keane is an australian economist
and author he's the author of debunking
economics and more recently the new
economics manifesto
pavlina chernova is an associate
professor of economics at bard college
and a research scholar at the levy
economics institute she specializes in
modern monetary theory and public policy
uh public policy so warm welcome to all
of you
and i'm gonna pass it over to steve
keane to
offer some thoughts on the last uh
uh fight club session and um maybe give
us some some brief thoughts on debt what
is it
why should it go
okay my sound is coming through
good all right okay um
the i'll start first of all with the
thank you to thomas piketty who couldn't
join us for this session um it is very
rare for mainstream economists to engage
with critics like myself and and michael
and pavlina so it's a
tribute to him that he was very generous
with his time and i thought also he's
very generous with his perspective in
the debate if i can characterize how
thomas would differ from myself and
michael thomas's recommendations at the
end of uh
his magnum opus capital were
fundamentally tax the rich
and the attitude which michael and
myself and uh have a concerning debt is
abolish the debt uh now of course if you
think about what taxes and what interest
payments are and what profit are they're
all flows
they're flows of money per year that's
how they're denominated and what
taxation says well let's read let's take
some of that flow away from the rich and
direct it to the poor that is the
conventional attitude towards taxation
and i'm sure pavlina will get in here
and elaborate the tax doesn't actually
pay for anything when you take a look at
the modern monetary theory perspective
on how government money is created the
government creates money by running it
by running a deficit so government
spending creates money taxation destroys
money
and it doesn't actually contribute to
anything it's the government as one of
the two primary money creators in a
capitalist economy can create the money
it needs for any particular task it
doesn't need to tax so what then is the
perspective on tax from from this
position it is fundamentally that
taxation decides whose bank account goes
down to reduce the excess money created
by government spending
and what we know from the last 30 years
or so is the rich are
incredibly successful at making sure
it's not their accounts that get
affected so what what would be what we'd
be doing
with um
uh
with with taxation isn't doing what uh
is the perspective from uh
pipity's capital in the first place
and secondly the rich are very very good
at evading it
uh now the point from michael and i'm
sure michael will elaborate very
effectively here on his own own behalf
but what we see and this comes out of my
own mathematical modeling i might add
is that debt increases the income of the
rich which is quite obvious it increases
the income of what we would call
rontiers but it actually in in my
mathematical modeling of minsky's
financial instability hypothesis it
actually directly reduces the income
share of the workers
uh if i in my simple models which i'll
explain in the written manifesto
the debt is by money is in that model
model exclusively by the firm that's the
simplification i made to start the model
and i did not expect this outcome
but what happened was the profit rate
that capitals got the owners of the firm
varied around an equilibrium level as
the level of private debt went up the
level of income going to workers went
down it was a direct relationship and i
explained the causal mechanism in
manifest so i won't try to elaborate
here
so fundamentally reducing the debt will
increase the share of income going to
workers and it's and and on top of that
we have the modern monetary theory case
uh that the government doesn't need to
borrow an order to spend uh doesn't need
to tax to finance it so all the things
like student debt are a travesty when
you intellectually understand how money
is created i'll hand back to the other
panelists thank you
wonderful thanks for that i want to hand
it to pavlina uh to give her perspective
on debt and you know i i wouldn't it's
modern monetary theory is really useful
in this but you know one thing we
encounter over and over again is this
assumption people have and it's because
it's part of right-wing ideology in
their frame that you know the state is
like a household
you know they can run out of money you
got to tighten your belt and budget in
this limited way so maybe i think
commenting on that if you're inspired to
it would be great
yeah thank you uh thank you for the
invitation um
i
want to start with uh actually david
graber's comment on um paradoxes that we
have in our daily lives how we have
turned like absurdities into
like common sense what people perceive
to be is common sense and this idea that
the government must behave as a
household
and especially when it comes to its
financial affairs uh is one of those
paradoxes that we like we have created
such mythology and
you know just uh a
culture of acceptance of of this um
basically flawed idea and it's all built
on a completely flawed understanding of
money on the history of money on the
origins of money and i will not go
through all of it now
but um just to say that even on the face
of it
when we consider a very basic simple
reality that the currency in our pockets
comes from one place and one place alone
and that comes from the public sector
just when we consider that basic
stylized fact
it can't possibly be true that the
government needs to get money from us to
pay for its expenses when it has the
ultimate means find issues the ultimate
means final means of payment
so
um
mmt really zeroes in on that under
theorized aspect of the monetary reality
there is private debt there is private
uh money creation of all at all levels
we use this hierarchical
model to describe it but the public
currency is under theorized
and so governments have had this
prerogative to issue their currencies
and and even in the old days to stamp
their gold coins they have had this
prerogative
and they must first provide the currency
before they can retrieve it back in the
form of tax payments or or
bonds purchase bond sales
and so what mmt basically stresses is
that the the causality is completely
upside down it's reversed
the issuer must provide the currency
before the users can use it to pay taxes
to purchase government securities so a
fundamental contribution from an mmt a
point of view is that a government is
self-financed
but you must
also look at the kind of government
you're talking about we have so adopted
these mythologies that governments must
behave like households that we have
created these monetary systems in these
monetary regimes which artificially
constrain this very basic prerogative of
government and then we force the public
sector to behave like a household to tax
in order to pay so you know countries
that give up their own currencies that
dollarize that except for that that
actually inherit colonial currencies you
know they are fundamentally constrained
in in in many ways in managing their
domestic economic affairs so um
the public sector we need to be looking
at what kind of
monetary regime we're looking at what
kind of institutional design we have
what kind of coordination we have
between our institutions to meet our
economic objectives so lesson number two
from mmt is that zeroing in on these
arbitrary ratios
debt to deficit debt to gdp deficit to
gdp ratio these are really uh red
herrings they divert our attention from
the important issues how does the
government spend on what does it spend
what kind of policies do we as
democratic polity demand of the
government and have we surrendered them
to this false ideology that the
government does not have money and that
it must
pinch its pennies like a household
i'll just pause here and we can carry
this further yeah so much to dig into
but michael would you like to weigh in
and respond to these comments and maybe
say anything you didn't get to say in
the last session before we go deeper
pauline is quite right when she says
that uh public debt is not the problem
uh private debt is a problem so i want
to pick up what uh steve keane said
because he was addressing the issue that
kept coming up in the debate and uh what
was the argument uh with picketing uh
piketty wanted to tax wealth to make uh
people more equal the problem is the
taxes leave the existing economic
structure in place so uh if you had if
you taxed uh the banks uh the debts
would still mount up you'd still have
student debt you'd still have
foreclosures you'd still have insolvency
but uh the some the rich would have to
pay some of the cost of impoverishing
society to the government uh which
doesn't really need it anyway uh so i
don't think that uh uh taxes uh
address the problem that steve and i are
talking about that the economy has a
real structural problem and uh from uh
what david graber and i talked about for
years uh debt is what the 99 percent
owed to the one percent most people are
in debt and most debts are owed to one
percent of the population and uh paying
this debt leaves less disposable income
for the debtors uh less for students
because if they pay student debt they
can't afford
to buy a mortgage to uh take a buy a
home uh homeowners i have to pay
mortgage debt uh and can't afford to buy
goods and services uh credit card
companies auto loans uh most of the
people who wanted to disagree with what
uh steve and i are saying about the need
uh to cancel this debt that is
bankrupting the economy is well isn't
that a choice it's a voluntary bargain
between uh uh borrowers and debtors why
do you want to interfere with the free
market and the voluntary bargain well
the bargain is your money or your life
you want a home or you want to be uh
sleep in the sidewalk oh you want a home
you got to go into debt uh do you want a
job well you're going to have to get a
degree get a degree you're going to have
to go into debt unless uh your parents
were uh bankers or had enough money uh
to put to put you through uh so most uh
most debts throughout most of history
weren't voluntary they were arrears they
were uh cultivators on the land that
there was a crop failure there was a war
they couldn't pay the debts most debts
were just uh regular income that
couldn't be paid and uh the creditors
use the misfortune of society like the
covent crisis as uh an opportunity to
make money and uh you can see that here
in new york uh where uh we all are uh
right right now there are a lot of
people that have lost their jobs a lot
of people uh
these people either are renters and
can't pay the rent or if they bought a
home that can't pay the mortgage uh
there was a moratorium biden
said well we can't just throw all these
people out on the street let's have a
moratorium it expires in february in
february tens of thousands of new
yorkers are going to be evicted thrown
onto the street and uh their houses are
going to be put up for sale uh and there
are a lot of uh investment companies
just waiting to pick up uh all of these
houses so uh that what steve and i are
talking about is debt is not in
equilibrium debt grows exponentially and
it it ends up engulfing the whole
economy and that's why uh you get to
choose do you want to keep the debts in
place and let the economy polarize and
uh shrink or do you want to write down
the uh cred the savings of the one
percent that are invested in loans to
the 99 percent
yeah well said one phrase from the debt
collective to get at this point you know
they're making your money your life is
we're not in debt because we live beyond
our means but because we're denied the
means to live and so i think it
i i'm sure people here you know
everybody agrees that debt abolition a
dead jubilee is coupled with social
provisions right pavlina's written about
jobs guarantee right i mean the thing is
this was the old idea of a jubilee too
debt cancellation plus you'd get land
back or you know the means of the means
of survival
um
but you're you're making a really
important point which is you know people
are basically and this is stuff we just
see at the deck like every day in the
debtors we speak to who are desperate
sometimes suicidal you know i mean this
is
um
this is such an urgent issue for so many
people
that you know makes people poorer but it
also you know makes people sicker and
there's a lot of evidence to back that
up
um but people are robbed twice right
they're underpaid at the job and then
forced to borrow to survive and this is
definitely a means of
wealth extraction it makes makes the
rich richer the poor poor
i another way to put this is that that
isn't just about money it's about power
and you all have hit on that um do
people want to say anyone feel inspired
to take that up right i mean this is you
know why do we have this system why does
it stay if we can point out all the ways
it's seemingly irrational and fair you
know why is it so entrenched and that's
because this is this is power it's not
just a way to get money it also keeps
people under the thumb of creditors and
david graper was or not just of
creditors but
um of employers
uh do people want to speak to that at
all
the way debt is obstructs democracy
keeps people down
well it wasn't supposed to be that way
power that was uh the first debts uh
anthropologically were uh the virgil
debts if you were in a primitive society
and you injured somebody uh
you have to pay reparations you have a
choice if you beat somebody up break his
arm or kill someone either your family
would feud with them and you'd all begin
fighting or you'd pay reparations uh the
whole idea of debt
the whole economy functioned on credit
long before there was money there was
credit uh if if you were a farmer in
mesopotamia in 3000 bc uh
you uh
get the cro what do you do during the
crop year uh
money was used one day a year uh for the
farmers in mesopotamia that's uh when
the harvest time came in uh on the uh
and the debts that they owed for uh the
beer that they drank at the local uh ale
house and we have the records of the ale
house uh and for the uh
food or for the horses or for the water
uh when you go to the ale house you'd uh
run up a bill uh a tab just like today
and it all came due uh on at harvest
time and everything would be paid and uh
that worked except once in a while there
was a crop failure uh or there was a
drought and hammurabi would say if the
people can't pay the debt uh
we're going to cancel it because if they
can't pay the debt and they become a
slave of the ale lady do we really want
the cultivators all to
end up the debt servants in bondage uh
owing their crops to the ale lady and
then we're not going to be able to get
them to work on the
corvae work to build uh palace malls and
uh temples and big ditches and we're not
going to be able to uh get the uh crop
taxes uh from them so the whole idea
debt was supposed to be in equilibrium
and when it couldn't be paid every early
society wiped them out and all of that
uh
occurred until greece and rome it was
really rome that made debt a means of
getting uh getting labor into debt and
having to work off the debt on the land
of the uh
the creditor and uh
we're still living with the uh backwash
of roman law
and that that's the problem our legal
system uh is uh
pro-creditor and this went against
every society that preceded rome and
that's become the legal system of
western civilization
yep really interesting yeah pavlin you
want to win
i i love where uh michael took this
conversation
you know um
when we look at graber's book you know
debt is a social relationship and it
became monetized through time
but even early on there was this kind of
coercive relationship between
authority palace king and subjects and
that was the tax that's a debt that's a
sort of debt and that tax was always
there to to compel to force the
production of goods and resources to
provision the palace okay this is
unavoidable and that tax was used to
eventually you know kind of standardize
the unit of account how we pay these
debts and michael's work is very good um
in illustrating that when
private creditors gained so much power
over credit creation
then the peasants were
obligated to the private creditors and
they were not as obligated to the state
in terms of delivering
corn and barley and grain to the palace
so the palace actually that weakened the
palace capability to do dead jubilees
because the palace could say i forgive
you your debts if you had a crop failure
you don't have to deliver the grain to
me but the private creditor would not do
that now why does the palace tax because
the palace not only needed to provision
for itself and you know again it's the
riches it's all power
but also they did build you know corvail
labor was infrastructure it was public
work so there was some semblance of kind
of public good provisioning however
coercive that was
that is very much fast forward to the
present day that is very much the
function of the tax today the public
sector which issues its own currency
does not need to tax to collect the tax
to finance its public projects the
function of the tax is still for the
public to require the public's currency
to work in exchange to provision goods
and services and it is
you would you would you know one might
argue in a democratic sense our
expectation of the state is then to
provide public goods um that will
provision for the community as a whole
now what does this have to do with
student debt
well i mean student debt is one of those
debts that actually can be forgiven that
the vast majority of student debt is
held by the public sector it is there is
a small proportion that is held by
private you know you know privately
issued debt and not backed by government
guarantees but as we have said shown at
the libya institute um it is uh without
major disruptions in fact to the private
sector which you probably want to create
disruptions you can cancel it you can
have a debt jubilee with student debt um
and so i think that broadly i would
think about taxes in this way that they
are you know certainly historically a
coercive mechanism they are certainly a
force that compels us to work
in exchange for money and now we and and
we have had you know uh you know
various campaigns about you know
taxation without representation which
presupposes certain democratic demand
right that we want the collective to do
something for all of us but we need to
kind of connect that to theorizing what
the money can do what the public sector
with the public currency can do
if it is going to tax and if it's going
to attract resources then it has a
reciprocal
obligation to then quote unquote provide
for the good life and this whole
mythology that we can't cancel the debts
that somehow it's inequitable for the
rich kids to have their debt cancelled
along with many other things are just
disempowering narratives
that we can do x y and z
can i elaborate something that uh
pavlina just said she's absolute she
pointed to the key point that uh the
reason that student debt can be
cancelled is its own to the government
not private banks so there's no lobbying
organization that's going to come in and
say uh you can't interfere with private
enterprise uh she began but earlier uh
she said that the uh the uh that was the
power of the ruler uh over uh the
debtors uh that's the people that the
rulers of mesopotamia really wanted
power over was that over the creditors
every early society stabilized itself by
preventing the emergence of a creditor
oligarchy and uh the uh over and over
again you'd see creditors getting rich
then all of a sudden they would
disappear from the record uh and uh the
idea is that uh all the way down through
the byzantine empire uh the rulers uh
would say we don't want a wealthy credit
or oligarchy because they're going to
use this labor as an army and they're
going to overthrow us and then they're
going to write all the laws and then we
won't get any more taxes uh they'll get
all of the money and they'll be the uh
the new king so uh the uh the look at uh
china for instance china is in the
position of uh
to its uh economy that the u.s is to the
student debtors it's easy to write down
the debts if the debts are owed to
yourself that's why the mesopotamians
were able to write down the debts it's
because they were all owed to the palace
and the temples and uh they also can't
make sure that the debts to the private
creditors uh were cancelled and they'd
move against the creditors so the key in
preserving democracy was to have what
president biden calls an autocracy an
autocracy is someone who says the public
interest is more important than the
interest of creditors
i think that's really you know for me
coming from the deck like there's a lot
of really interesting strategic
questions here because that is why we
focused on student debt precisely for
this reason because we know
we you know what it the majority as you
say is held by the federal government
nevertheless the government was
pretending it didn't have the power to
cancel it so we had to throw that in its
face multiple times and you have made
headway there
and and you know if there are leverage
points against private creditors it's
that they're violating laws consumer
protection laws that they're engaging in
robo-signing or shenanigans but we have
less we do have less leverage and i
think there's really there's some
strategic
major strategic challenges that are
being raised here steve would you like
to come in um and maybe uh
i don't know the standard you know
response to some of this talk is you
know but we need the creditors they're
they're productively investing capital
and if debts are abolished won't they go
on strike and not you know lend to
people
yeah i mean
the important point i think we've i i
like the way that we go we're taking
with javelina as well uh to talking
about where this originated because we
go right back and i'm i haven't yet yet
i must admit uh david graves like the
latest and last book
and that's my reading on my flight to
australia on from on friday
but if you look at where this we all
began humans
built societies built on mutual
obligation and we'd actually do things
for each other it was actually
fundamentally a gift based society was
the the
the really ancient basis of how humans
behave towards each other and that has
been perverted over time into what we
now call debt it first of all went
through the mesopotamian systems where
michael explained the role very well now
it's been taken over by the private
sector and what we have is i divide the
world into three major social classes
workers capitalists and bankers
and what has happened is the bankers are
the ones the financial sector are the
ones who've completely distorted that
original role of
the thing which makes us a human society
and that made it into a form of bondage
uh for part of that society but the
trouble of that bondage to describe this
disguised by economic theory and if you
have any exposure to neoclassical
economics you would know of things like
what's called the medigliani miller
hypothesis that says it it's actually uh
ultimately if you're paying interest at
all it's better that a corporation be
100 financed by debt
you get uh the argument that the
government has to borrow off the public
um
which really treats money as being
something like as my good friend michael
kumoff the only new festival economist
who understands money uh says that it
treats money like gravel that has to be
dug up and dumped in some person's
storage system and then dolled out when
necessary there's a physical thing
rather than a sense of obligation
designed either between the public and
the government or the public and the
private bank sector
so once we if we realize that the
we have two major institutions to create
to create money
governments are spending more than they
get back in taxation or banks lending
out more than quebec and repayments the
question is what into those is that
money used we take a look at the private
sector
the the financial sector has used
economic theory without knowing they're
doing it but use economic theory as a
cover to finance asset price inflation
and to put us in debt into into bondage
for the remainder of it it is not a
creative use of money at all uh
banks when after the great depression
which was the last time we had a serious
uh debt crisis that then led through
dramatic transition to society
bankers were under were
a despised class in the beginning of the
40s and 50s and they were controlled
their role was to provide
investment finance for
industrial capital
that back in those days the level of
private debt the the non-financial
sector's private debt was roughly 40
percent of gdp and most of that was
corporate there if you fast forward to
the financial crisis that rose to 170 of
gdp and it was predominantly household
debt and a large part of that household
debt was actually what gave us the
bubble in the in-house prices in the
first place you had a negative a a
damaging feedback relationship between
debt asset prices and ultimately a
financial collapse so we have we need to
have a decent theory and mmt is part of
that theory the other part is minsky's
financial instability hypothesis they
are quite compatible with each other and
what they tell us is we should reduce
the level of private debt and if you do
that rather than taking money away from
the poor rich as well in what you do is
give more money to workers who spend
more so you actually get we're not
modelled a modern debt jubilee you get a
boost in economic activity and
ultimately even the capitalist benefit
so this is one of those terrible cases
where ideology leads us into a trap that
makes everybody off
put some people in power over the poor
yes uh really interesting comments i'm
i'm here scanning some of the questions
from the last fight club and we have
actually answered a couple of them um i
mean one you just used the word
stabilizing one person asked
uh wouldn't um wouldn't cancelling debts
be destabilizing and you're actually
saying the opposite which i think the
research shows which it actually would
be good for
terrorism in in a kind of idealized
version of it where it actually wants to
share prosperity
uh yeah michael you're pointing me about
uh cancelling the debt and why it's
stable is you cancel savings on the
other side of the balance sheet
we're talking about debt but all this
debt is somebody else's savings and uh
the problem is that almost all the
savings in the economy are now owned by
the one percent that's why david
popularized the concept of one percent
and the best thing you can do uh if you
cancel the depth to the one percent you
wipe out their savings and you take away
their dominance just like the 19th
century finally took away the power of
landlords that they had since feudal
times and that was what triggered uh in
the takeoff of industrial capitalism you
have to cancel this rontier uh claims on
society that uh the
creditor uh doesn't really play a
productive role
he collects interest in asleep just like
the landlord collects interest in his
sleep
landlords creditors rontiers monopolists
they do not play a productive role so
what do you destabilize you destabilize
the destabilizer
papalina did you have a thought yet if i
can
yeah yeah okay finish stephen i'll step
in
i'm sorry okay um yeah
what we if we did that i mean
that that is the ideal let's get rid of
the the power structure but of course
the instructions got the power so we
would lose that battle
inevitably so the proposal i've been
putting forward which actually uses the
concept of mmg as well is a modern debt
jubilee and that says look there are
there are two ways you can create money
the government can spend more than it
gets back in taxes the private banking
will then get back in in repayments now
if you use the government's power you
could actually give everybody an equal
amount of money and say if you have any
debt you must cancel that debt
so you create money which means that for
the for the for the uh creditor class
what they have is their loans disappear
but they get they get money in bank
account and step okay they get reserves
fundamentally so they don't actually end
up losing out but what it does is by
giving everybody the same amount of
money you give far more to the workers
than you give to the capitalists and
rentiers and by that mechanism you
actually end up stimulating the economy
you can even set it up so that the bonds
interest paid on the bonds by the
government takes place of interest paid
on debt by the private sector and the
rentiers end up coming out getting the
sort of money that you submit the the
role of banking was described as the i
think the numbers are three six and
three
uh borrow at three judge charge at six
and be on the golf course by three pm
now that's where they bloody well belong
they don't long running running
washington in what i now call the
financial politico complex get them back
on the golf course where the uselessness
can be put to something productive
well steve your proposal to bail out the
billionaires is very good for you
billionaires uh sitting there but uh the
fact is we really want to leave these
billionaires with all the money this
this debate came up with the civil war
uh when you wanted to get rid of slavery
uh people said well if abraham lincoln
cancels slavery he has to pay the slave
owners and lincoln said absolutely not
slave owning is wrong and we're not
going to create a new wealthy class to
dominate the country by paying them for
all the money that they've got from
slaves you don't want to bail out
to make the creditors whole come on uh
i don't have a billion dollars like you
but uh i certainly might want to bail
out these pastors
all right
so paulina i want you to respond to this
but i also want to throw you one more
question from the last session that i
think
and this person asked uh the main result
of quantitative easing appeared to be an
increase in the value of assets such as
share prices and housing i'm assuming
they're talking about you know early
2020 when coveted hit
when the government bought a lot of bad
corporate debt steve mentioned corporate
debt so the person asked to what extent
are the central banks captured by the
interest of the richest in society and
what should be done about this
okay so that's exactly where i was going
to go with this conversation i mean dead
jubilees happen all the time
you know what did we do in 2008 you know
the government stepped in with
extraordinary
budget and purchased enormous amount of
toxic financial assets it i i don't know
what else we can call it there do you
believe not you know making these assets
whole um you know so it is it's a it's a
type of a dead jubilee um what did we do
during covet you know we passed the
economy uh governments appropriated
again budgets that they had not uh
appropriated in post-war history in any
crisis you know japan i think it passed
56 of gdp a budget overnight the united
states 27
that has to concentrate the mind
the government has enormous the
government has all the financial
resources that it needs to grease the
economic wheels to pause student debt to
pass moratorium on on mortgage payments
um so it's just a matter of choices um i
would say that um
you know the tax system obviously
doesn't doesn't do this what we want to
do is simply eliminate extractive
services right we want to to eliminate
kind of unproductive predatory practices
you know unsustainable practices i think
that there is a way to certainly you
know pacify the rentier class by
replacing private debts with public
debts because those are default
risk-free and that's what we do
all the time and so i think for the debt
collective this is an argument to say
you have a public purse that is
regularly used for
these kinds of purposes to forgive debts
in the private sector we can certainly
deploy it for student ads
and i so so the question here is
um the state the government creates the
only default risk-free asset that's the
only one that can do this you know
europe is grappling with this you know
they have designed a system that they
cannot create a default risk
risk-free bond and they changed and
broke their own rules during the
pandemic to make sure that the european
central bank actually purchases these
government bonds to make sure that the
bills are paid and there's no question
asked that is the monetary reality and
we just work around it to kind of limit
our policy space so qe what was huey i
mean qe was a a way of basically you
know ensuring the positive value of
something that is essentially worthless
some insurance on some you know
derivative that uh you know the
financial sector created just to create
financial return financial profits
there's no productive you know uh value
to this kind of activity we are
essentially validating the
financialization of the economy through
qe in order to uh
to prevent some sort of financial global
class collapse could we have done it
differently of course we could have made
companies whole we could have made
households whole we could have made big
industrial you know firms whole we
didn't have to necessarily to rescue the
financial sector which is the way we
went about this and so
um i don't quite
believe that the qe is what fed an asset
bubble it definitely supported
values of assets that had no value the
market suddenly realized these are not
worth anything and so we supported those
assets it's that we permit the financial
sector to do what it does that feeds
this financial bubble and we don't have
the regulations i don't think interest
rates are going to do the job or
stopping qe will stop this kind of
speculative behavior so
is the banking sector captured
in many ways and one of the most
important ways is ideology is this this
belief
this this deep belief that somehow we
have to manage our economic affairs
through this this construction the
private market rather than acknowledge
the powers that we have in our public
institutions and deploy them
i mean but part of the appeal of bond
financing things isn't just that
you know
rich investors get their payments but
that it's a way of
circumventing democratic deliberation
too right that's part of the benefits
like oh well sorry
you know we we have to pay back the
bondholders so democracy goes out the
window right so there's all this value
added for
the one percent even that is such a
mythology like what is a bondholder
the bondholder is not financing the
government the government is providing
the bondholder an opportunity to earn
interest so it's completely upward
absolutely not a necessity that's right
we don't we don't need to have i like to
have treasuries in my retirement
portfolio okay it's the default
risk-free asset but uh it's not for
pacifying the bondholders that we need
to be doing all this so we got we're
getting i'm just trying to bring in the
questions from the q a which is there's
a lot of great stuff but uh nicole
brummer said the bailouts and the crisis
were like a jubilee but only for the
rich one percent so we're saying yes
indeed we could call these a kind of
jubilee how to make sure the jubilee
isn't stolen by the rich well we i mean
my sense is we haven't figured that out
because we don't have enough
counterpower debtors aren't organized
creditors are
um there's all this ideology we have to
debunk but curious if other people have
some thoughts about that
moving forward
so the next emergency isn't as
profitable
yeah i mean that i think that's a very
good point and that comes back to the
power structure talked with michael and
i'm having a difference of opinion over
there
because uh at the moment the power is
entirely uh
vested with the creditors and they
dominate how the government thinks as
well we need to break that nexus uh i i
would rather break it by a way that
actually shuts them up by stuffing money
in their mouth uh which is what they
seem to prefer to have to do
um rather than trying to decapitate them
because i've got a feeling that
at the moment um they have a more
powerful way of arguing than i have i
wouldn't like to see an abraham's track
abrams tank standing up outside my house
because my arguments were deaths for a
detour belief um so
uh
we we do have in the current situation
they will take over everything so if you
remember back when obama i was supposed
to be our progressive president um there
was is part of the proposal to
solve the cri the financial crisis was
enormous amount of mortgage reset that
never happened what did happen with that
gigantic transfer from from from what
eventually became qe and just to
elaborate on pavlina to some extent uh
when qe takes place that is
fundamentally the central bank with an
unlimited capacity literally unlimited
getting reserves for for financial
institutions in return for bonds now
when they do that with banks that are
just an asset swap but the bank can't do
anything with that money but when they
buy them off non-bank financial
institutions which frankly are owned by
the banks then those non-financial
institutions end up with reserves they
can't get any investment to turn out of
so they go and buy shares
so and all housing so in that sense the
sqe did directly boost house prices
through the purchases of bonds off the
non-bank financial sector
so there's lots of uh great questions
here here's a provocative one from one
of our hosts at the uh hannah rentz
center um
if we abolish this is kind of utopian
begins with the utopian premise in a way
if we abolish taxes and abolish debt
it was gone
um and the government spends to provide
welfare and services don't we experience
incredible inflation is that sustainable
so that is from roger berkowitz uh
it's not
of course it's sustainable because right
now you have a choice either the banks
create credit and charge interest on it
or the government creates credit and
spends into the economy uh why is the
government money any more inflationary
than uh bank money uh the fact is that
when the government spends money into
the economy it's usually on
infrastructure on payments to people and
the production and consumption economy
when banks lend money uh create money
they create it just like uh the
government prints money but they created
for people to bid up the price of houses
for people to take over other
corporations they buy to buy assets not
for goods and services so the government
creating uh this money that banks are
creating is actually much less
inflationary it will not increase the
price the cost of housing it will not uh
increase stocks and bonds it will just
be spent into the economy uh and
the fact that the government creates it
as opposed to somebody else is
doesn't mean a thing
i'm going to come back to michael have a
good argument here we've been at this
for a long time
but i'm actually going to point out that
one of the problems with this is that
if you look at the scale of government
spending back there for the first world
war it literally thought in the american
economy
government spending was less than five
percent of gdp
now if you finance that by spending
without taxation that's not a problem
because you actually want your economy
to impact before we hit the ecological
crisis which is another question i've
seen there before we hit the ecological
limits you wanted the money to buy to be
growing by about at least five percent
per annum to enable commerce to continue
expanding in an expanding economy but
now when you when you go up after the
stage of big government which occurred
after the
great depression at the second world war
government spending is the order of 30
of gdp now if you injected 30 of udp
every year in the economy with money
that does not itself depreciate
then you would have runaway inflation so
the problem actually is not just the the
the creation of money the need for
taxation and so on it's the thing we
actually create allegedly has a value
which remains constant and doesn't fall
now
gazelle keynes praised the monetary
theorist gazelle by saying gazelle's
idea of depreciating money was a very
effective idea that you could create
money and if you didn't use it it
depreciated rapidly and that was
actually used in the the town of wargle
during the second world during during
the
great depression to fight the the
collapse of the economy caused by the
credit system failing and wargle ended
up having full employment until they
were shut down by the austrian central
bank so
it is actually fundamentally the fact
that money is set up so that it
shouldn't depreciate when in fact when
you look at an ecological sense and
a social sense maybe we should have
created a form of money to depreciate it
on its own and then you could have had
government spending whatever scale was
necessary and the money depreciating
over time without needing taxation to
cancel its excess create creation
compared to the the scale of economic
activity in the economy
so i want to yeah go for it and then
after this because i kind of agree with
both government spending is not
inherently inflationary but government
spending without taxation as steve keane
is saying this is very large
contribution to the economy and tax
taxes retrieve some of this purchasing
power but i would go even further let's
go back to the history of money that
that the role of the tax is very
important in the launch of units of
account and
uh of what you might call like you know
the state money so what is the purpose
of the tax it is the the purpose is to
transfer resources to the public sector
and so if we abolish that
that has implications for the value of
the currency currently occurring
you know without a doubt but also it has
implications for this transfer of
resources from the public private to the
public domain and so i'm very willing
and happy to entertain ideas of
collective provisioning but clearly the
tax serves this function of providing
some sort of resource to the public
sector which today we expect that will
be then redistributed in a more
equitable way
real resource not money
so i want to take us uh i want to take
us back to the ecological question that
came up in the last session in a minute
but first there's quite a few questions
actually here about student debt which
is what we advertised the panel to be
about i just want to read a couple of
them and i think i might be missing some
sorry
uh
uh nezla asks how is the national
student debt forgiveness program likely
to affect university enrollments
wouldn't it need to be paired with a
future solution such as free college is
that problematic i do want to say
you know and this is partly a david
graberism we actually reject the term
forgiveness which implies a that
the the borrower did something wrong
part of why we try to use
uh words like cancellation uh abolition
etc uh and then this ties another
question if i can find it related
there's a um
in dr greber's book jobs he had
proposed universal basic income as a
potential solution in reducing the
leverage and balance between workers
employers
could this be a potential solution to
reduce and eliminate student debt i
think
there were some others as well but
people want to speak on any of those
i'll just dive into the the
exp sending for education is one of the
classic cases in which the government
can spend money into the economy and not
have a bureaucrat decide how it gets
spent you give it to the students and
say you spend it and in that sense it's
the it's almost the perfect means for
government money creation when one of
the replies about government money
creation is you don't want bureaucrats
deciding what to do you want consumers
and you want entrepreneurs well give it
to the students they'll spend they're
the consumers and it will turn up and
the entrepreneurs will try to make you
know make gain out of the student
spending and and that is a very creative
way for government spending to be
undertaken and the the travesty that's
one reason i'm delighted not to be in
the university sector anymore the
travesty of what student debts how
students thought about their education
and how a bunch of moronic uh
bureaucratic uh capitalists took over
universities and screwed them up
completely uh we'd be of a far better
university sector it was completely
government funded and the entry
requirements were not how much money you
borrowed but how many how many brain
cells you had and how well you didn't
examine how creative you were that
should be the barrier to getting into
universities and universities should be
run by the academic not run by the
bloody bureaucrats and the debt
financiers
there's a simpler way of explaining uh
this point all over most of the world
education is free uh and for most of the
world throughout history education has
been free it's a public utility just
like there is public health that's free
what is the there's no need to charge a
penny for education china doesn't pay uh
other countries uh have free education
america is unique in uh charging an
enormous amount of uh
for uh for education that should be a
free public utility
before you get there by as you say with
brains
yeah
and this is how i see universal basic
income you know uh this is a basic
income that is a guaranteed uh you know
free access to
you know what we consider to be the
basic essentials of life uh what is
social security it is an income
guarantee because we a society we have
decided that we don't want people to be
working in their old age um free public
education free um health care i think um
i think the i the idea here is to
rethink what the good life is and how we
can attain it
the idea that somehow a income grant
alone addresses these kind of deep
structural questions i think
uh you know i would challenge that i
think that basic income guarantees are
essential uh for many people who are not
participating in
in whatever we call a market economy but
we also want to think about the
structural aspects how we provide
this quality of life i can give you 30
a year and you cannot buy health
insurance rent and all the other things
on the market today
um wonderful i'm going to actually
self-promote here and put a little film
in the chat that is called you are not
alone that i released earlier this year
that has some discussion of
what you know free pub we really need if
we're going to have couple student debt
cancellation with free public college we
have to make sure that it's abundant
that there are now so all sorts of you
can have you know a public good that
isn't offered at the scale that it's
needed and there can be other
inequalities that manifest in that so it
kind of gets into some of those deeper
questions and problems
um the ecology point
uh because people raised this in the
last fight club i think it's important
you know where how does this all hook
into the problem of growth um i mean i
see two ways one is you know debt and
interest locks us into a model of
endless growth right the idea we're
going to have more tomorrow than we have
today so we're pushed to exploit planet
and people more but then also when we
talk about that jubilee we often go
it'll boost the economy it'll be great
there'll be growth
um
i don't know is that
is there a contradiction there uh how
does you know we're we're we're in an
ecological crisis let's talk about it
kevlin you want to go first you're on
camera yes sure happily i mean i i turn
to graber again you know uh
the
the concept of the human economy that
you know everything is premised on on
care our entire existence is premised on
care it's not on an economy and an
economy this economy is a construct you
know it's a modern construct but if we
kind of really think deeply about the
human condition of what we do even in
the capitalist economy on our daily life
what we do is we take care of our
children of ourselves of our friends we
entertain each other we feed each other
we educate each other like the vast
majority of our work is actually care
work but we have just you know
commodified it in this particular way so
the the environment is this kind of
crucial dimension because it's
existential uh you know we can't quite
reproduce a society if we have
cannibalized you know the very basic
resources on which we vitally depend so
like you know for me it is like a
fundamental rethinking of what what is
work what the economy is doing what its
purpose is why do we have even this
market what is it supposed to deliver to
us and if it cannot why aren't we
delivering it in other ways it's it's a
kind of reimagining so the the climate
concern is i think you know the the
conversation is quite correct you know
growth cannot be a measure of success in
pretty much anything
um
and except you know the profit returns
and so with respect to these very large
existential questions um we need to be
thinking about the how to's and uh
you know technology not just purely
technical solutions but also the social
implications of these technical
solutions
i'm going to dive in with my other work
which is actually on climate change and
economics and
uh
i i have been
if there's only one thing that's
horrified me more about the thinking of
managing economists and how they treat
money it's how they've treated the
ecology uh the stuff which nord house
got a nobel prize for is garbage that
should never have been published and
what's come after that is even even
worse uh the the ridiculousness they are
actually talking about the six degree
increase in temperature causing no more
than a ten percent fall in gdp there's a
recent paper saying that if we lose
every major tipping point on the planet
gdp will be 1.4 percent lower than if we
didn't lose the amazon of the
gulf stream greenland the arctic west
antarctic it's ludicrous it's nonsense
it's garbage that means we're actually
on the cusp of gigantic ecological
crisis and the only way out of it i'm
afraid in my opinion is to it to finance
at the monetary side of this we have to
be spending on carbon rather than
spending on money so i'll put a set of
proposals together where they call
carbon rationing and if you search for
carbonrationing.org you'll find those
ideas uh developed by a guy called adam
hardy uh in the first instance and the
idea there is that we'd have a parallel
of two tubes price systems uh you'd get
a universal carbon credit which you'd
have to spend as well as spending money
uh the universal carbon credit be given
out equally richard murdock would get
the same carbon credit that michael
hudson got uh but of course michael
hudson would never exhaust his carbon
credit whereas rupert would run out in
half a minute and have to buy it off
michael and that would be a form of
redistribution of wealth
as well as a way of limiting the damage
we do for the carbon we're putting out
into the into the atmosphere
there is a particular relevance to
global warming uh and pollution to what
we're talking about debt uh think of the
economy of debt pollution the debt uh is
growing exponentially as steve has shown
uh and any rate of interest is a
doubling time uh think of all this
growth of debt this savings that uh
charges interest that's growing
exponentially this is like carbon into
the atmosphere the models are really
very similar and in both cases uh this
exponential growth stiffens stifles the
economy
and economists are responsible
mainstream economists frankly
neoclassical economics has to go the
most dangerous thing for capitalism is
not these lefties here talking about
dead evolution it's near classical
economics avoiding the real issues in
capitalism
i mean what it also ties back into how
we began this which is the the
public money could do a lot of things
like finance a green new deal right like
finance adjust transition that i mean
that i think is also the the debt logic
the ideology we're in prevents us from
saying hold on we have the money to
finance the transformation we need to
make sure everyone's taken care of right
like that is that that's kind of the
core of of it
um
i want to ask a question here just
because i think it's
uh something we're all hearing about
um
which is the inflation narrative um this
question is one of the first ones we got
as the inflation narrative is
increasingly being discussed in the
mainstream media as a phenomenon that
disproportionately punishes the poor
versus the rich well economic theory
recognizes that inflation
um
operates as a transfer of wealth from
savers to debtors what role might
inflation play in modern debt jubilee or
you know does this conversation give us
any tools to reject the the narrative
we're hearing about inflation right now
again pardon me jumping in quickly uh
inflation can actually be seen as an
accidental form of gazellian money
uh the inflation uh actually reduces the
debt burden if the the money in
circulation is falling in value uh while
the uh actually if the inflation's
occurring it's actually reducing the
real value of debt
and that actually is a lubricating thing
for the global economy and since the
debt is mainly owned by the 99 cents of
the one percent i see that inflation
actually benefiting up to a certain
point not not in hyperinflation
obviously but benefiting the poor at the
expense of the bridge and that's one
reason why the rich are so
anti-inflation so
i think in michael there's done plenty
of work on that issue as well so
inflation i would see it as someone
that's below hyperinflation levels uh it
is actually it actually benefits the
poor more than the rich
i mean i'll
step in here and so inflation is one of
those other
miss theorized macro phenomena by by the
profession that has been used so
effectively
to like justify all sorts of things like
we constantly use inflation as um not
providing enough support for the economy
or to make you know using unemployment
to fight inflation i mean that is just
like extraordinary feat of neoclassical
economics to say
that working people have to be the
bulwark against inflation there's no
other phenomena that is like supposed to
be our defense against you know the dark
inflation so it's it's just that there
is just this mythology that we can't
achieve both full employment price
stability number two inflation is used
to uh constantly disempower government
spending because the assumption is the
government spending is inherently
inflationary which we know it is not
correct the pandemic bears it out we
spend a third of the economy in one year
and we see all the inflation coming in
from the private sector from bottlenecks
from supply chains from from logistical
problems from shutting down various
sectors in the economy globally and on
top of it
this is very well exploited by firms we
just saw today the bloomberg article
that the first giant corporations in the
united states are posting record profits
since the 50s they're exploiting this
kind of partly media fueled fear of
inflation a customer has resigned
themselves that this is inevitable
they're not going to run away from their
um from the firm but also their
monopsonists like where are we going to
go and buy our stuff when we have this
huge concentration of power and so
they're using the pricing power that
they have to be able to extract profit
margins that are far higher i think
inflation is definitely concerning to
people and that can be a destabilizing
social force and you want to mind you
know how you know what happens to to
folks purchasing power how they perceive
this but there are ways to deal with
this that are not um you know
sacrificing uh growth in employment
well-being etc finally
what if there is inflation are we going
to let the planet burn i do like this to
me that doesn't even make sense like we
we cannot wait we can't like structure
the right commercial return or wait for
the right inflation or get the right
private interest to do the job we have
public money we have a crisis we need to
mobilize it immediately and we need to
deal with it then we tackle inflation
there are ways you know
to deal with structure and i think there
are examples of just you know
structurally dealing with inflation
around the world but uh
i'll stop here
yeah there's a really uh um
sorry we're a little all over the place
but that's that's that's a live chat
here i think this one is it was is
important though all around the world
rising housing prices are locking out
first-time buyers or forcing them to
take out enormous mortgages
will a debt jubilee on mortgages affect
housing affordability uh you know and
not everyone can take out a mortgage
right that's forcing a lot of people to
be renters but it is striking that we
have historically low mortgage rates you
know uh they
really went down after the pandemic you
know when you see mortgage rates of 2.85
or 3 you sure don't see that on credit
cards or payday loans or other kinds of
consumer debt um so it feels like
there's lots of interesting things to
talk about
uh this and and um
uh
someone who who feels inspired to take
it um and i'm also hearing resonances of
michael's comments about the rent the
eviction mortorium's ending and i think
it's important to underscore that yes
people have had eviction more terms but
that rent has been piling up
right it wasn't
a cancellation of people's rent so some
estimates are saying people owe 50
billion 70 billion dollars of back rent
um there's not michael go for it
you're muted michael
admit yourself
it has to be said yeah now can you hear
me okay this question came up in the
third century bc in sparta
the king decided that uh the spartans
were so much in debt he was going to
cancel the debts uh and uh
one of his relatives uh his uncle
actually convinced them only cancel the
mortgage debt well it turns out to
cancel the mortgage debts who had the
mortgages the the rich people if you
cancel the mortgage debts donald trump
will be the richest man in the country
the most commercial property owners have
um one percent or a tenth of a percent
of their capital it's all debt you would
be giving the biggest giveaway of wealth
in american history to the large
commercial uh in uh mortgage uh uh
property owners that all of a sudden
wouldn't have to pay the banks at all so
the last thing you want to do uh is to
give it away there is a way around this
you would have to if you are going to
cancel the debts on mortgage you want to
make sure that the government gets all
of that rental value that you're just
giving away to the uh to the absentee
owners by uh a property tax which is uh
what what china's doing uh look at what
happened in russia russia could have got
back all of the mineral wealth and the
housing that uh we also gave away
simply by taxing away all of the revenue
from what it gave away so if you do
cancel the mortgages you'd have to
replace it with a with a full taxation
uh so that you don't give a free lunch
to the most heavily indebted people the
rich own most of the debts the rich are
the biggest debtors and you don't want
to forgive the debts of the rich you
want to forget the debts that people
like
also
and that's then that's why i've talked
in terms of the modern dead you believe
mate rather than the old traditional one
because i if i modeled this in in
manifesto you would have a modern dead
jubilee which would give you 100 000 per
person to repay your debts and therefore
rupert murdoch would have your debt for
by a hundred thousand dollars and
pavlina would have a debt fall by a
hundred thousand dollars i think rupert
would know that rather less than
papalina so the idea is to do this at an
equal level an equal footing create the
money is the government's capacity to do
that and therefore it dramatically
reduces the debt of the poor and in fact
the poor could end up being
net positive uh while the rich still
have those debts they don't get out of
it so
we have to think intelligently about how
to do this and also i saw one question
there about the housing issue uh getting
rid of the mortgage that's alone the
mortgage of the poor rather than the
rich um you would still have the
capacity for this for the banking sector
to recreate debt and get us back in an
asset bubble again and empirical
research and my own modeling shows that
what actually causes rising house prices
is rising levels of new mortgage debt so
the way to stop that is to say and this
is again it means a political shift as
well to achieve it is to say that banks
can no longer lend as much as they like
for a house they can lend say for
example no more than 10 times the annual
rental income for a house now that would
remove the
amplifying feedback that currently
exists between new mortgages and house
prices get rid of that and and therefore
you get rid of what's actually causing
the bubbles in the first place
that's exactly what happened in 1960s
when i came to new york that's how
things work uh banks would not lend uh
to anyone uh where the debt service uh
was more than 25 of their income
and now it's uh
everything's been removed you're
absolutely right this is how to do it
the three of us are all talking about
the economy as a system not separating
uh debt in one part from another and
cutting it apart we're looking at the
overall system and that's not what uh uh
neoclassical economics does
paulina do you have thoughts on this or
should we move on
no yeah i mean i think just like we talk
about a student that jubilee coupled
with free public college we there's a
problem with how
we approach housing we have to approach
our housing as a speculative asset
instead of something that we live in and
so there's all sorts of forms of social
housing and other ways to provide for
that human uh need so as we as we get
towards the end i want to start asking
questions that maybe uh are even even a
bit push the envelope a bit further so i
want to mix two one from
um uh
one from chad elsin he asked how much
power are we willing to give to the
government to manage our lives by giving
it the control of the financial water we
swim in i want to combine that with a
question from nika that i just have to
find
uh nika
um
our wonderful uh co-host asks
uh so the cat so
um
so the capital is power you say that the
state
or the palace is obviously better than
private creditors i'm interested in
whether a situation with more democratic
distribution of power is possible or in
other words what would a society look
like where wealth is not automatically
converted to power
um so both of these
kind of loop us back to some of the
original questions about the creditor
being the state or the private sector
and
add some wrinkles
i think that's i think that's a very
both very good questions framing uh the
one of the strongest arguments people
make against government money was
that'll let bureaucrats control what
happens rather than letting the public
rather than letting private
entrepreneurs control it
in the university sector and seeing the
amount of money wasted by bureaucratic
initiatives there i'm sympathetic to
part of that argument so we do have to
consider how do we stop uh uh
people who's
letting a subset of society control the
rest of society and that again is why
things like spending on infrastructure
on education uh on health
by the government over the government
funds those entirely uh removes that
issue you decide how much of your
economy should be spent in education how
much should be spent on health the
government provides that money and then
that money goes out through the
professionals who decide how it should
be spent and the individuals receive it
they also decide how that money is spent
so we don't have to get caught up in the
situation where a bunch of bureaucrats
make stupid rules uh that waste money
and so on and of course at the same time
we're going to come back as they have a
lot of very gifted bureaucrats and we
need to get back to the stage where we
can see people in the public sector
being there for public service reasons
we need to get that that ideology back
into place and part of the nonsense
buchanan has given us where we always
regard bureaucrats as bad but out of
that we've actually had a bunch of bad
bureaucrats and we need to reform the
government side of things almost as much
as the private money system
so i would answer this um to say that uh
it's not so much
that the state per se is the issue but
the way the state is governed and
captured right and so which would be the
disempowering narratives that we want to
tackle head on for mmt it's very clear
taxes do not pay for government spending
that immediately disempowers the wealthy
class we don't need the taxes of the
rich we don't need them to fund our
policy priorities because we have
institutions that are perfectly capable
to fund what we desire and so you see
this dichotomy of people
supporting uh you know universal
healthcare education etc but they are uh
kind of surrendering to this ideology
that we are we can't do this because we
need to find the pay for that is the one
gridlock that we see play out over and
over and over again across the globe and
we need to remove this tool from the
conversation from people's like you know
like understanding about money we do not
depend on tax says to fund um these
public priorities i also then
i am thinking about various ways in
which society organizes itself right
because we try together to to
fill gaps where the state has not
contributed right if we don't have
universal healthcare we have solidarity
economy if we don't have and we
certainly can't expect that there will
be a bureaucrat that can come into my
community and say well you should do
this this and this like the community
knows like their environmental needs
care needs this is where my own work
comes in that you can actually deploy
you can actually effectively do ground
up support these networks solidarity
networks endless variety of communities
associations you name it
that can that are already doing the kind
of care work that we've been talking
about but they are disconnected from
this like uh important source of finance
and they're captured in the ideology
that they need private credit or some
tax from somewhere so i would you know i
would actually bring these these two um
the chain the paradigm the paragraph
just the footnote of what you said
paulina nobody has ever said uh you have
to pay as you go when it comes to
military spending
somehow nobody's ever said where are we
going to get the money they only say it
when it comes to spending into the
economy that you and i are talking about
uh the people
yeah well it's good to tax the rich too
they don't have so much money to buy the
political influence they have which
you know absolutely this is this is
absolutely and i think you know i would
go back to the initial conversation you
know i mean how high a tax do we do we
need and the the concentration of wealth
is so high that taxing income is not
going to do the job you know do it 90
okay we've done it before but it's just
not going to disrupt these other
processes by which wealth is
accumulating and so you need to think
structurally about just removing these
opportunities to make money like that
would be my preference of restructuring
the economy um and then you know yes you
should tax certain activities out of
existence you know but i wouldn't even
say tax you just ban
you know a certain kind of extraction
you know maybe you know predatory
practices you know regulatory tools can
be used for that
well somebody here asks you know are we
avoiding the p word for planning it
sounds that this is dt cochrane uh it
sounds like we need to
uh need planning to direct spending
investment rather than leaving it to the
market if so aren't we saying that it's
not how else do we get where we want and
need to go i mean i i guess i would also
just underscore another theme here which
has been the way
these debt relationships
uh uh again circumvent or override
democratic deliberation and democratic
planning um you know by saying oh the
again the bonds the credit rating agency
says this we can't do that it's off the
table um but what do you think about
planning michael uses every economy is
planned our america is the most
centrally planned we're more centrally
planned than china but the central
planning is done by wall street not by
the government every of course uh it's
it's centrally planned the question is
who's going to do the planning ever
since the uh the neolithic you had to
plan for the crops you had to plan to
allocate resources the government has
left the planning to the uh to the
financial sector and the financial
sector lives in the short run
governments are supposed to live in the
long term so we're talking about uh
short-term people
looking at what they can grab in the
next three months of the year uh and
what uh steve keane's model and i are
talking about or the long-term uh which
is uh the public point of view
pavlina
yeah i mean you know institutionalists
this is a kind of a starting point for
institutionalist economic theory that
you know uh planning is always there the
question is who does the planning you
know in the earl roaring 20s is the
cartels and the trust and that was the
corporate sector um we have always had
planning minsky's work which is kind of
you know evolutionary institutionalist
financial theory you know he argues that
there was a short period of time where
we had
kind of a managerial economy where the
public sector took the larger role of
public investment directing public
investment employment that was right
around world war ii and soon thereafter
but then we quickly liberalized and then
we had planning by the financial sector
as michael uh pointed out so that i
think that that you know it's a dirty
word but i think it's absolutely
unavoidable if you just look a little
closely more closely at just the
institutional structure and the
evolution of the economy and you know
there are questions we have to ask going
forward you know how we tackle climate
uh responses and if if our insistence is
that we're gonna have some you know
private um you know mega corporations
through incentives and nudges that they
will do the planning i think we are
definitely abdicating our democratic
responsibility um uh yeah so i want to
close this out with a really simple and
elegant question and maybe we can
channel david graber a bit who had some
um but
they asked would the abolition of debt
also abolish borrowing
right um
or are we always borrowing it each other
and owing banks is it something else
that's a problem but yeah maybe uh
pavlina begin with you and then we'll go
to steve and then michael and we'll
close up
i i think that the question
has certain premise that maybe i'm i'm
not super comfortable with because you
know for me
uh in a graveyard sense right money is
connected to debt but that is not social
obligation and that's not something that
we can kind of cancel and abolish we
have this kind of you know a sense of
reciprocation to one another and however
we trace the history of those
relationships money has been there and
so money uh to me represents that i know
what i think the question is asking that
we are having this you know dependence
on privately created private debt and i
think that that you know requires
restructuring but can you stop me from
giving you a loan i don't know if that
is a possibility the question is like
what do we do with that
i think we've taken the current
circumstances we're in of a debt cri
ecological crisis coming our way
then we have to in that situation think
we have to fundamentally redefine money
now if we think about the question about
planning beforehand uh largely near
classical economics and mainstream
capitalist ideologies did let the
entrepreneurs let the business people
decide how to plan they'll get it right
but that was true wouldn't be facing an
ecological crisis they are short-term
thinkers we do need the long-term and
the government is normally the
repository that long-term thinking the
trouble is of course their interests
have been captured by the financial
class and we've that's that's why we've
delayed action on climate change for 50
years now if we have to redefine money
in the context of an ecological crisis
then most of the money has to be created
in response to our ecological needs and
that's where my idea of a of a parallel
carbon uh currency and universal carbon
credits would be part of that to limit
what we spend because country we've
spent too much we as
the human society on this planet takes
up far too much of them
well
regarding debt cancellation resources
and that is actually undermining us and
destroying our capacities
regarding debt cancellation when i began
my uh uh harvard group on the history of
debt in the 1990s uh the argument by
archaeology by the right-wing uh
archaeologist and anthropologist was you
couldn't possibly cancel the debts in uh
uh in mesopotamia because who would ever
lend money well obviously as soon as
they cancel the debts it all began as
pavlina said all began all over again
and uh so then the uh people uh the uh
right winger said you see it didn't work
canceling doesn't work it begins all
over again well of course it begins all
over again it does work in wiping out
the overhead of death and then the whole
thing will begin all over again until
society lets too much debt accumulate
and when too much debt accumulates then
you turn on the therm the debt
thermostat and you wipe it out uh and
that happened again and again uh with
every new ruler in the bronze age in
mesopotamia uh also all throughout
antiquity uh so that's just a false
argument that uh these people not only
don't read history they try to prevent
uh uh anthropological history from being
uh read or or published uh just because
it's ideologically against their uh
right-wing pro-creditor arguments
thank you all we're definitely seeing a
war on history these days um uh so you
know we know from history the debt
cancellation that jubilee is possible
but i fully believe we need to build
better power to get there so please join
the debt collective um get organized our
slogan one of our many slogans is you
are not alone a space l-o-a-n one thing
that does is it isolates us
uh you know there's stigma there's shame
so a first step is overcoming that and
banding with others i'm going to pass
the mic to tara from the hanaren center
so thanks all for being here
um on behalf of this uh hannah wren
center and
all of our co-sponsors nika the museum
of care pavlina and economic democracy
initiative um
i want to just thank everybody for this
fascinating
excellent relevant topical discussion
and um pavlina steve michael astra thank
you for your tremendous moderating and
um
i hope that you all stay in contact with
our organizations including astr's debt
collective the hannah rent center you
can google us find us at bard.edu see
more of our events um we have active
youtube channels and i know nika there
is there are more fight clubs coming up
and it sounds like this conversation is
still just getting started that's that's
my my my feeling um that we could still
keep going so
and thank you most of all to our
audience for staying engaged posing such
great questions and um really pushing
this conversation where it needed to go
okay everyone
thank you again
good night
good night bye
ah
that was fantastic very very good
conversation all around yeah i didn't
mean to give you about being a
billionaire just